#California Census Project
This project is using data from the Census Bureau to determine if the Los Angeles Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) should be expanded. I looked into the commuting data to see if Riverside, San Bernardino and Ventura county met the requirements to be added.
#Background
As of now, the Los Angeles MSA consists of just Los Angeles County and Orange County. However, Los Angeles is also part of a Combined Statistical Area (CSA), which is a grouping the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) creates when there is a significant amount of overlap between more than one MSA or their smaller counterparts Micropolitan Statistical Areas (μSA). The Los Angeles Combined Statistical Area consists of the LA MSA, the Inland Empire MSA (Riverside and San Bernardino Counties) and the Oxnard–Thousand Oaks–Ventura MSA (Ventura County). Many people feel that Inland Empire and Ventura County are simply suburban counties of Los Angeles, or are increasingly so, and thus should be part of the MSA.
The metrics for being in an MSA or a CSA is based on the workforce population. If 25% of a county's residents works in the core county or if 25% of a county's workers are residents of the core county, then it is considered an outlying county in the MSA. For CSA's it is the same, but the number is only 15% and the county must be part of its own MSA or μSA.
#Data
In order to determine this, we need data from commute. The official designation uses the American Community Survey (ACS) Commuting Flow (https://www.census.gov/topics/employment/commuting/guidance/flows.html), based on 5-year ACS estimates for origin and destination county. Unfortunately for me, the most recent Commuting Flow, 2015-2020, has not been released and probably will not be until after the OMB makes their determinations. Instead, I relied on the Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics Origin-Destination Employment Statistics (LEHD) (https://lehd.ces.census.gov/data/), which is sourced from unemployment insurance data. This data is somewhat less expansive than the ACS, as it does not account for some job types such as self-employment, military employment, the U.S. Postal Service, and informal employment. All the differences between this dataset can be found here (chrome-extension://efaidnbmnnnibpcajpcglclefindmkaj/https://www2.census.gov/ces/wp/2014/CES-WP-14-38.pdf).
#Analysis
I imported the LODES Data into a SQL server on my computer that also contained other census data. The LODES Data consists of the census block of the residence, census block of the workplace and number of workers making this commute. I was not interested in the census block as it was too fine for this analysis, as I just needed the county of residence and workplace. Every census block code is actually a superstring that contains codes indicating the state and the county of the block, so I simply extracted the county code using a string slice. I then used joins to match this against a table of California counties and their codes, as well as using a Window to calculate the total number of workers and residents in that county. This was then grouped by workplace and residence county to see if the counties met the definition. This can all be found in Query.sql, and the results of this query can be found in percent_residents.csv and percent_workers.csv.
#Conclusion
I found that Ventura County and San Bernardino County meet the condition to be counted as part of the LA MSA. Riverside County still does not, befitting its more remote nature, but could meet the condition if Orange County is treated as a core county.
